# Creative Disturbance

Creative Disturbance currently runs on a couple of Wordpress installations. It consists of the following subdomains: 

| Domain | Description |
| - | - |
| [creativedisturbance.org](https://creativedisturbance.org) | The "live site." This is the official Creative Disturbance for users. It contains the most up to date podcasts and releases. |
| [dev.creativedisturbance.org](https://dev.creativedisturbance.org) | For development and testing. We push changes to this to get feedback and make sure things don't break, before updating the "live site." |
| [dev2.creativedisturbance.org](https://dev2.creativedisturbance.org) | A second development site, originally created to test alternatives to the Castos podcasting plugin, but currently inactive. |
| [old.creativedisturbance.org](https://old.creativedisturbance.org) | The original version of Creative Disturbance, now inactive, since the redesign. It was simply moved to this domain instead of being deleted. |

?> There is an experimental project in progress called Podcaster (see [podcaster-admin](https://github.com/almadireddy/podcaster-admin) and [podcaster-api](https://github.com/almadireddy/podcaster-api), created by Al Madireddy in June/July 2019, that aims to create a platform for Creative Disturbance in Node.js and React. This was started to address the biggest pain-point of the current setup: the wordpress blogging platform being retrofitted to work as a podcasting platform. 

## Architecture

The current Creative Disturbance platform (not old.creativedisturbance.org) consists of the following parts:

  1. The `Creative Disturbance` WordPress theme
  2. The [Pods](https://wordpress.org/plugins/pods/) plugin for WordPress.
  3. The [Seriously Simple Podcasting](https://castos.com/seriously-simple-podcasting/) plugin for WordPress by Castos.
  4. [Libsyn](https://libsyn.com/) - podcast hosting


### Creative Disturbance Theme

This works at the basic level like any other WordPress theme: You can copy it into the `wp-content/themes` folder and it will show up in the Dashboard as an available theme to choose from. It is custom developed to be used with our specific plugins and functionality. It has the code necessary to pull the correct data out of pods, and a lot of custom styling based off of the ReDisturb redesign process that occured in 2018. 

!> The theme sensitive to our particular installation and configration of pods and the fields of those pods. Changing anything in the pods configuration has the capacity to break what the theme outputs. Therefore, care must be taken so that the code is updated alongside Pods configuration changes.

### Pods

[Pods](https://wordpress.org/plugins/pods/) allows us to define custom content types by their schema that we can then create/read/update/destroy. We use Pods to define things like Hosts, Voices, Podcast Categories, etc. For example, this is a partial definition of a Podcast on CD: 


| Field Label | Field Name | Field Type | 
| - | - | - |
| Featured on Homepage | featured_on_homepage | Yes/No |  
| Language | language | Relationship to "Language" Pod |  
| Category | podcast_category | Relationship to "Podcast Category" Pod |  
| Hosts | hosts | Relationship to "Hosts" Pod |  
| ... | ... | ... |

The "field label" is the human readable name of the field, "field name" is the technical name of the field, the one used in code, and "field type" is the kind of field, which can be many things such as a `string`, a `Yes/No`, which is analagous to a boolean, and a `relationship` which lets you define things like a "Podcast" `belonging to` a "Host". 

It's very similar to defining something like a table in a database. 

Once a pod is defined a content admin can use the Dashboard to create a new instance of the pod in the database using the pages generated by Pods. Things like the `Yes/no` will be converted to a checkbox, and `string` into a text box, allowing the content admin to focus on just filling out the information. 


### Seriously Simple

This plugin comes with some features that cut down on how much work we need to do for the "listen to a podcast" functionality. 

It comes with the Podcast and Series custom data types (both of which we extend with pods). It comes with things like the podcast art, media URL and things that the content admins can just fill out to create new podcasts and series. It also comes with the podcast player that is seen on the actual page itself. 

We build on top of this with Pods to achieve some of the custom functionality we want like Hosts and Voices. 

### Libsyn

Libsyn is where we actually host our podcast files. We put in the Libsyn URLs into our Podcasts when we publish. This means that our most important data - the podcasts themselves - are securely stored off of our servers. The Libsyn servers are also more available than ours, meaning podcast streaming is a lot faster than if we were to host them. 

---

Contributors: Al Madireddy